---
date: 2021-01-08T11:15:58-04:00
description: 
featured_image: ""
tags: []
title: "Conclusions"
---

When I first started looking at information about the AI and its impact on the protests in Belarus, I thought that Andrey Maximov's video of the facial recognition of Belarusian police officers was my main focus. 
However, I was wrong, there is no doubt that Nexta and a handful of other telegram channels have played a key role in informing the world about the post-election turmoil in Belarus. Some observers, however, voice discomfort, depending too much on these sources. The information they exchange is scattered, anonymous, contextless, and some of it tends to be unverified despite the best efforts of its. But it is clear, that so much information put on of handful of people is a lot, and not always the given information can be checked 100%. 
The famous for Andrey Maximov's Youtube video wasn’t to show the AI facial recognition software’s abilities, but it was more of a wakeup call to Belarus government and police. For him it doesn’t matter if this information was true or false, he just wanted their reaction and for them to feel unsafe, so the violence would stop. But from the AI point of view it was more of a fantasy video, I think the main fail for this to be real was the lake of data, because, it can’t be possible to a software developer, that lives in USA n get the full database of Belarus police files, even Nexta channel only got 1,000 the names and addresses. So, my option is that Andrey Maximov him self found these people, found a match, and made a video about it, it got what he wanted- attention, but it wasn’t related to AI. And the example of Andrey Maximov mistakenly identifying a person and putting a wrong name out on internet is very dangerous, and this innocent person can get hut ( in Nexta chapter, the Fig.a. picture) is great example what people that are protesting can do. I would say that this can has raised major ethics and privacy concerns.
A big surprise for me was the app Krama, very easy to use, understandable and recognition of GTIN code is immediately, so I would say that this app is really great and it is fully completing its main goal – inform costumer whether a manufacturer of a particular product or company itself is connected to Lukashenka or state-owned. And this app works even if the internet is off.
How Belarus's protest movement will evolve is difficult to predict. One factor, however, is difficult to ignore: social media and common encrypted messaging applications, such as Telegram, play an increasingly noticeable role even in countries where information/cyber security has a significant say in the government. Such media amplify the concerns of angry and frustrated people and have a tremendous capacity for mobilization. 
